.\" $Id: nbest-mix.1,v 1.3 1999/10/18 15:14:10 stolcke Exp $
.TH nbest-mix 1 "$Date: 1999/10/18 15:14:10 $" "SRILM Tools"
.SH NAME
nbest-mix \- interpolate N-best posterior probabilities
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B nbest-mix
[\c
.BR \-help ]
option
\&...
.I weight1
.I nbest1
.I weight2
.I nbest2 
\&...
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B nbest-mix
reads a number of N-best lists (which must contain identical
hypotheses), computes the hypothesis posterior probabilities for each,
and computes a new posterior distribution that is a
weighted mixture of the input distributions.
The hypothesis with the highest combined posterior probability is
printed.
.PP
The command line arguments form an alternating list of 
weight values and N-best file names.
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.B \-help
Print option summary.
.TP
.BI \-debug " level"
Controls the amount of output (the higher the
.IR level ,
the more).
.TP
.BI \-write-nbest " file"
Outputs the N-best list corresponding to the interpolated 
posterior distribution to a file.
This suppresses the printing of the best hyp.
.TP
.BI \-max-nbest " n"
Limits the number of hypotheses read from each N-best list to the first
.IR n .
.TP
.BI \-rescore-lmw " lmw"
Sets the language model weight used in combining the language model log
probabilities with acoustic log probabilities
(only relevant if separate scores are given in the N-best input).
.TP
.BI \-rescore-wtw " wtw"
Sets the word transition weight used to weight the number of words relative to
the acoustic log probabilities
(only relevant if separate scores are given in the N-best input).
.TP
.BI \-posterior-scale " scale"
Divide the total weighted log score by 
.I scale
when computing normalized posterior probabilities.
This controls the peakedness of the posterior distribution. 
The default value is whatever was chosen for 
.IR lmw ,
so that language model scores are scaled to have weight 1,
and acoustic scores have weight 1/\fIlmw\fP.
.SH "SEE ALSO"
nbest-lattice(1), nbest-scripts(1).
.SH BUGS
Probably.
.SH AUTHOR
Andreas Stolcke <stolcke@speech.sri.com>.
.br
Copyright 1998 SRI International
